Abstract

The study of phase separation using minimal models of active matter has been a topic
of recent interest. Such a transition is caused by an interplay between motility and
excluded volume interaction. While such systems have been well studied during the last
several years, it is still an intriguing question to ask if there is more to understand in
the phase diagram than what is already known. In this thesis, our main aim has been to
understand how the phase properties of such an active system is affected by the strength
of the excluded volume interaction.
In the first problem, we study the effect of a crucial parameter, namely the softness of
the inter-particle repulsion, using a simple model of active Brownian discs interacting via a
generalized Weeks-Chandler-Andersen (WCA) potential. We demonstrate that increasing
the softness of the particles limit the ability of the system to phase separate, resulting in
a delayed transition. After phase separation, the system state properties can be explained
by a single effective length scale, the effective inter-particle distance. Using a mean-field
approximation, we estimated this lengthscale and used it to rescale the system properties
with varying interaction softness in the dense phase. Using this lengthscale, we provide a
scaling relation for the time taken to phase separate, which shows a strong sensitivity to
interaction softness.
In the second problem, we use a different form of interparticle interaction, namely a
harmonic potential, that allows a larger overlap between the particles. We demonstrate
that the interaction softness of active particles destabilizes the highly ordered dense phase,
resulting in the creation of a spanning porous cluster. This soft limit can also be reached by
increasing particle motility over a critical value at which the system clearly exhibits all of
the characteristics of a conventional percolation transition. Additionally, we demonstrate
that active particles exhibit analogous transitions in the athermal limit, even at low
motility. With the addition of these new phases, the phase diagram of repulsive active
particles is shown to be more complex than previously thought.
The third problem is an extension of our previous work where we explore the effect
of both heterogeneity and interaction softness. We consider a binary mixture of active

Brownian particles with different particle softness and investigate how the interplay be-
tween heterogeneity in the composition, interaction softness, and motility affects the phase

behavior of the system. We show that, similar to the homogeneous system, the binary

i

system also exhibits the formation of MIPS as well as undergo a percolation transition.
We show that the overall phase behavior of this system is more complex, although the
multiple phase transitions obtained for a binary system with equal different composition
does follow a simple scaling, with the effective softness parameter, as observed previously
in the case of the homogeneous system. For different compositions this simple scaling is
violated. We additionally demonstrate that the MIPS phase exhibits a more complicated
internal structure due to the heterogeneity in composition.
